CONTRIBUTING.rst, before:

Contributing to PyMongo
=======================

PyMongo has a large `community
<https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/contributors.html>`_ and
contributions are always encouraged. Contributions can be as simple as
minor tweaks to the documentation. Please read these guidelines before
sending a pull request.

Bugfixes and New Features
-------------------------

Before starting to write code, look for existing `tickets
<https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_ or `create one
<https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_ for your specific
issue or feature request. That way you avoid working on something
that might not be of interest or that has already been addressed.

Supported Interpreters
----------------------

PyMongo supports CPython 3.6+ and PyPy3.6+. Language
features not supported by all interpreters can not be used.

Style Guide
-----------

PyMongo follows `PEP8 <http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_
including 4 space indents and 79 character line limits.

General Guidelines
------------------

- Avoid backward breaking changes if at all possible.
- Write inline documentation for new classes and methods.
- Write tests and make sure they pass (make sure you have a mongod
  running on the default port, then execute ``python setup.py test``
  from the cmd line to run the test suite).
- Add yourself to doc/contributors.rst :)

Documentation
-------------

To contribute to the `API documentation <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`_
just make your changes to the inline documentation of the appropriate
`source code <https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver>`_ or `rst file
<https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/tree/master/doc>`_ in a
branch and submit a `pull request <https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests>`_.
You might also use the GitHub `Edit <https://github.com/blog/844-forking-with-the-edit-button>`_
button.

Re-sync Spec Tests
-----------------

If you would like to re-sync the copy of the specification tests in the
PyMongo repository with that which is inside the `specifications repo
<https://github.com/mongodb/specifications>`_, please
use the script provided in ``.evergreen/resync-specs.sh``.::

    git clone git@github.com:mongodb/specifications.git
    export MDB_SPECS=~/specifications
    cd ~/mongo-python-driver/.evergreen
    ./resync-specs.sh -b "connection-string*" crud bson-corpus
    cd ..

The ``-b`` flag adds as a regex pattern to block files you do not wish to
update in PyMongo.
This is primarily helpful if you are implementing a new feature in PyMongo
that has spec tests already implemented, or if you are attempting to
validate new spec tests in PyMongo.

Commit message:

PYTHON-1834 Add pre-commit config

CONTRIBUTING.rst, after:

Contributing to PyMongo
=======================

PyMongo has a large `community
<https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/contributors.html>`_ and
contributions are always encouraged. Contributions can be as simple as
minor tweaks to the documentation. Please read these guidelines before
sending a pull request.

Bugfixes and New Features
-------------------------

Before starting to write code, look for existing `tickets
<https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_ or `create one
<https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_ for your specific
issue or feature request. That way you avoid working on something
that might not be of interest or that has already been addressed.

Supported Interpreters
----------------------

PyMongo supports CPython 3.6+ and PyPy3.6+. Language
features not supported by all interpreters can not be used.

Style Guide
-----------

PyMongo follows `PEP8 <http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_
including 4 space indents and 79 character line limits.

General Guidelines
------------------

- Avoid backward breaking changes if at all possible.
- Write inline documentation for new classes and methods.
- Write tests and make sure they pass (make sure you have a mongod
  running on the default port, then execute ``python setup.py test``
  from the cmd line to run the test suite).
- Add yourself to doc/contributors.rst :)

Running Linters
---------------

PyMongo uses `pre-commit <https://pypi.org/project/pre-commit/>`_
for managing linting of the codebase.
``pre-commit`` performs various checks on all files in PyMongo and uses tools
that help follow a consistent code style within the codebase.

To set up ``pre-commit`` locally, run::

    pip install pre-commit
    pre-commit install

To run ``pre-commit`` manually, run::

    pre-commit run --all-files

Documentation
-------------

To contribute to the `API documentation <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`_
just make your changes to the inline documentation of the appropriate
`source code <https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver>`_ or `rst file
<https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/tree/master/doc>`_ in a
branch and submit a `pull request <https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests>`_.
You might also use the GitHub `Edit <https://github.com/blog/844-forking-with-the-edit-button>`_
button.

Re-sync Spec Tests
-----------------

If you would like to re-sync the copy of the specification tests in the
PyMongo repository with that which is inside the `specifications repo
<https://github.com/mongodb/specifications>`_, please
use the script provided in ``.evergreen/resync-specs.sh``.::

    git clone git@github.com:mongodb/specifications.git
    export MDB_SPECS=~/specifications
    cd ~/mongo-python-driver/.evergreen
    ./resync-specs.sh -b "connection-string*" crud bson-corpus
    cd ..

The ``-b`` flag adds as a regex pattern to block files you do not wish to
update in PyMongo.
This is primarily helpful if you are implementing a new feature in PyMongo
that has spec tests already implemented, or if you are attempting to
validate new spec tests in PyMongo.
