=======
PyMongo
=======
:Info: See `the mongo site <http://www.mongodb.org>`_ for more information. See `github <http://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/tree>`_ for the latest source.
:Author: Mike Dirolf
:Maintainer: Bernie Hackett <bernie@mongodb.com>

About
=====

The PyMongo distribution contains tools for interacting with MongoDB
database from Python.  The ``bson`` package is an implementation of
the `BSON format <http://bsonspec.org>`_ for Python. The ``pymongo``
package is a native Python driver for MongoDB. The ``gridfs`` package
is a `gridfs
<http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/GridFS+Specification>`_
implementation on top of ``pymongo``.

Support / Feedback
==================

For issues with, questions about, or feedback for PyMongo, please look into
our `support channels <http://www.mongodb.org/about/support>`_. Please
do not email any of the PyMongo developers directly with issues or
questions - you're more likely to get an answer on the `mongodb-user
<http://groups.google.com/group/mongodb-user>`_ list on Google Groups.

Bugs / Feature Requests
=======================

Think you’ve found a bug? Want to see a new feature in PyMongo? Please open a
case in our issue management tool, JIRA:

- `Create an account and login <https://jira.mongodb.org>`_.
- Navigate to `the PYTHON project <https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_.
- Click **Create Issue** - Please provide as much information as possible about the issue type and how to reproduce it.

Bug reports in JIRA for all driver projects (i.e. PYTHON, CSHARP, JAVA) and the
Core Server (i.e. SERVER) project are **public**.

How To Ask For Help
-------------------

Please include all of the following information when opening an issue:

- Detailed steps to reproduce the problem, including full traceback, if possible.
- The exact python version used, with patch level::

  $ python -c "import sys; print(sys.version)"

- The exact version of PyMongo used, with patch level::

  $ python -c "import pymongo; print(pymongo.version); print(pymongo.has_c())"

- The operating system and version (e.g. Windows 7, OSX 10.8, ...)
- Web framework or asynchronous network library used, if any, with version (e.g.
  Django 1.7, mod_wsgi 4.3.0, gevent 1.0.1, Tornado 4.0.2, ...)

Security Vulnerabilities
------------------------

If you’ve identified a security vulnerability in a driver or any other
MongoDB project, please report it according to the `instructions here
<http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/tutorial/create-a-vulnerability-report>`_.

Installation
============

If you have `setuptools
<http://pythonhosted.org/setuptools/>`_ installed you
should be able to do **easy_install pymongo** to install
PyMongo. Otherwise you can download the project source and do **python
setup.py install** to install.

Do **not** install the "bson" package. PyMongo comes with its own bson package;
doing "easy_install bson" installs a third-party package that is incompatible
with PyMongo.

Dependencies
============

The PyMongo distribution is supported and tested on Python 2.x (where
x >= 4) and Python 3.x (where x >= 1). PyMongo versions <= 1.3 also
supported Python 2.3, but that is no longer supported.

Additional dependencies are:

- (to generate documentation) sphinx_
- (to auto-discover tests) `nose <http://somethingaboutorange.com/mrl/projects/nose/>`_

Examples
========
Here's a basic example (for more see the *examples* section of the docs):

.. code-block:: pycon

  >>> import pymongo
  >>> client = pymongo.MongoClient("localhost", 27017)
  >>> db = client.test
  >>> db.name
  u'test'
  >>> db.my_collection
  Collection(Database(MongoClient('localhost', 27017), u'test'), u'my_collection')
  >>> db.my_collection.save({"x": 10})
  ObjectId('4aba15ebe23f6b53b0000000')
  >>> db.my_collection.save({"x": 8})
  ObjectId('4aba160ee23f6b543e000000')
  >>> db.my_collection.save({"x": 11})
  ObjectId('4aba160ee23f6b543e000002')
  >>> db.my_collection.find_one()
  {u'x': 10, u'_id': ObjectId('4aba15ebe23f6b53b0000000')}
  >>> for item in db.my_collection.find():
  ...     print item["x"]
  ...
  10
  8
  11
  >>> db.my_collection.create_index("x")
  u'x_1'
  >>> for item in db.my_collection.find().sort("x", pymongo.ASCENDING):
  ...     print item["x"]
  ...
  8
  10
  11
  >>> [item["x"] for item in db.my_collection.find().limit(2).skip(1)]
  [8, 11]

Documentation
=============

You will need sphinx_ installed to generate the
documentation. Documentation can be generated by running **python
setup.py doc**. Generated documentation can be found in the
*doc/build/html/* directory.

Testing
=======

The easiest way to run the tests is to install `nose
<http://somethingaboutorange.com/mrl/projects/nose/>`_ (**easy_install
nose**) and run **nosetests** or **python setup.py test** in the root
of the distribution. Tests are located in the *test/* directory.

.. _sphinx: http://sphinx.pocoo.org/
