README.rst, before:

=======
PyMongo
=======
:Info: See `the mongo site <http://www.mongodb.org>`_ for more information. See `GitHub <http://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver>`_ for the latest source.
:Author: Mike Dirolf
:Maintainer: Bernie Hackett <bernie@mongodb.com>

About
=====

The PyMongo distribution contains tools for interacting with MongoDB
database from Python.  The ``bson`` package is an implementation of
the `BSON format <http://bsonspec.org>`_ for Python. The ``pymongo``
package is a native Python driver for MongoDB. The ``gridfs`` package
is a `gridfs
<http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/GridFS+Specification>`_
implementation on top of ``pymongo``.

PyMongo supports MongoDB 2.6, 3.0, 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, 4.0, 4.2, and 4.4.

Support / Feedback
==================

For issues with, questions about, or feedback for PyMongo, please look into
our `support channels <http://www.mongodb.org/about/support>`_. Please
do not email any of the PyMongo developers directly with issues or
questions - you're more likely to get an answer on the `MongoDB Community
Forums <https://community.mongodb.com/>`_.

Bugs / Feature Requests
=======================

Think you’ve found a bug? Want to see a new feature in PyMongo? Please open a
case in our issue management tool, JIRA:

- `Create an account and login <https://jira.mongodb.org>`_.
- Navigate to `the PYTHON project <https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_.
- Click **Create Issue** - Please provide as much information as possible about the issue type and how to reproduce it.

Bug reports in JIRA for all driver projects (i.e. PYTHON, CSHARP, JAVA) and the
Core Server (i.e. SERVER) project are **public**.

How To Ask For Help
-------------------

Please include all of the following information when opening an issue:

- Detailed steps to reproduce the problem, including full traceback, if possible.
- The exact python version used, with patch level::

  $ python -c "import sys; print(sys.version)"

- The exact version of PyMongo used, with patch level::

  $ python -c "import pymongo; print(pymongo.version); print(pymongo.has_c())"

- The operating system and version (e.g. Windows 7, OSX 10.8, ...)
- Web framework or asynchronous network library used, if any, with version (e.g.
  Django 1.7, mod_wsgi 4.3.0, gevent 1.0.1, Tornado 4.0.2, ...)

Security Vulnerabilities
------------------------

If you’ve identified a security vulnerability in a driver or any other
MongoDB project, please report it according to the `instructions here
<http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/tutorial/create-a-vulnerability-report>`_.

Installation
============

PyMongo can be installed with `pip <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo

Or ``easy_install`` from
`setuptools <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools>`_::

  $ python -m easy_install pymongo

You can also download the project source and do::

  $ python setup.py install

Do **not** install the "bson" package from pypi. PyMongo comes with its own
bson package; doing "easy_install bson" installs a third-party package that
is incompatible with PyMongo.

Dependencies
============

PyMongo supports CPython 2.7, 3.4+, PyPy, and PyPy3.5+.

Optional dependencies:

GSSAPI authentication requires `pykerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pykerberos>`_ on Unix or `WinKerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/winkerberos>`_ on Windows. The correct
dependency can be installed automatically along with PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi]

MONGODB-AWS authentication requires `botocore
<https://pypi.org/project/botocore/>`_ and `requests
<https://pypi.org/project/requests/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[aws]

Support for mongodb+srv:// URIs requires `dnspython
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/dnspython>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[srv]

TLS / SSL support may require `ipaddress
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ipaddress>`_ and `certifi
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/certifi>`_ or `wincertstore
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wincertstore>`_ depending on the Python
version in use. The necessary dependencies can be installed along with
PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[tls]

.. note:: Users of Python versions older than 2.7.9 will also
  receive the dependencies for OCSP when using the tls extra.

OCSP (Online Certificate Status Protocol) requires `PyOpenSSL
<https://pypi.org/project/pyOpenSSL/>`_, `requests
<https://pypi.org/project/requests/>`_ and `service_identity
<https://pypi.org/project/service_identity/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[ocsp]

Wire protocol compression with snappy requires `python-snappy
<https://pypi.org/project/python-snappy>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[snappy]

Wire protocol compression with zstandard requires `zstandard
<https://pypi.org/project/zstandard>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[zstd]

Client-Side Field Level Encryption requires `pymongocrypt
<https://pypi.org/project/pymongocrypt/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[encryption]

You can install all dependencies automatically with the following
command::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi,aws,ocsp,snappy,srv,tls,zstd,encryption]

Other optional packages:

- `backports.pbkdf2 <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/backports.pbkdf2/>`_,
  improves authentication performance with SCRAM-SHA-1 and SCRAM-SHA-256.
  It especially improves performance on Python versions older than 2.7.8.
- `monotonic <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/monotonic>`_ adds support for
  a monotonic clock, which improves reliability in environments
  where clock adjustments are frequent. Not needed in Python 3.


Additional dependencies are:

- (to generate documentation) sphinx_

Examples
========
Here's a basic example (for more see the *examples* section of the docs):

.. code-block:: python

  >>> import pymongo
  >>> client = pymongo.MongoClient("localhost", 27017)
  >>> db = client.test
  >>> db.name
  u'test'
  >>> db.my_collection
  Collection(Database(MongoClient('localhost', 27017), u'test'), u'my_collection')
  >>> db.my_collection.insert_one({"x": 10}).inserted_id
  ObjectId('4aba15ebe23f6b53b0000000')
  >>> db.my_collection.insert_one({"x": 8}).inserted_id
  ObjectId('4aba160ee23f6b543e000000')
  >>> db.my_collection.insert_one({"x": 11}).inserted_id
  ObjectId('4aba160ee23f6b543e000002')
  >>> db.my_collection.find_one()
  {u'x': 10, u'_id': ObjectId('4aba15ebe23f6b53b0000000')}
  >>> for item in db.my_collection.find():
  ...     print(item["x"])
  ...
  10
  8
  11
  >>> db.my_collection.create_index("x")
  u'x_1'
  >>> for item in db.my_collection.find().sort("x", pymongo.ASCENDING):
  ...     print(item["x"])
  ...
  8
  10
  11
  >>> [item["x"] for item in db.my_collection.find().limit(2).skip(1)]
  [8, 11]

Documentation
=============

You will need sphinx_ installed to generate the
documentation. Documentation can be generated by running **python
setup.py doc**. Generated documentation can be found in the
*doc/build/html/* directory.

Testing
=======

The easiest way to run the tests is to run **python setup.py test** in
the root of the distribution.

To verify that PyMongo works with Gevent's monkey-patching::

    $ python green_framework_test.py gevent

Or with Eventlet's::

    $ python green_framework_test.py eventlet

.. _sphinx: http://sphinx.pocoo.org/

Commit message:

PYTHON-2112 Change api.mongodb.com to pymongo.readthedocs.io

README.rst, after:

=======
PyMongo
=======
:Info: See `the mongo site <http://www.mongodb.org>`_ for more information. See `GitHub <http://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver>`_ for the latest source.
:Author: Mike Dirolf
:Maintainer: Bernie Hackett <bernie@mongodb.com>

About
=====

The PyMongo distribution contains tools for interacting with MongoDB
database from Python.  The ``bson`` package is an implementation of
the `BSON format <http://bsonspec.org>`_ for Python. The ``pymongo``
package is a native Python driver for MongoDB. The ``gridfs`` package
is a `gridfs
<http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/GridFS+Specification>`_
implementation on top of ``pymongo``.

PyMongo supports MongoDB 2.6, 3.0, 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, 4.0, 4.2, and 4.4.

Support / Feedback
==================

For issues with, questions about, or feedback for PyMongo, please look into
our `support channels <http://www.mongodb.org/about/support>`_. Please
do not email any of the PyMongo developers directly with issues or
questions - you're more likely to get an answer on the `MongoDB Community
Forums <https://community.mongodb.com/>`_.

Bugs / Feature Requests
=======================

Think you’ve found a bug? Want to see a new feature in PyMongo? Please open a
case in our issue management tool, JIRA:

- `Create an account and login <https://jira.mongodb.org>`_.
- Navigate to `the PYTHON project <https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON>`_.
- Click **Create Issue** - Please provide as much information as possible about the issue type and how to reproduce it.

Bug reports in JIRA for all driver projects (i.e. PYTHON, CSHARP, JAVA) and the
Core Server (i.e. SERVER) project are **public**.

How To Ask For Help
-------------------

Please include all of the following information when opening an issue:

- Detailed steps to reproduce the problem, including full traceback, if possible.
- The exact python version used, with patch level::

  $ python -c "import sys; print(sys.version)"

- The exact version of PyMongo used, with patch level::

  $ python -c "import pymongo; print(pymongo.version); print(pymongo.has_c())"

- The operating system and version (e.g. Windows 7, OSX 10.8, ...)
- Web framework or asynchronous network library used, if any, with version (e.g.
  Django 1.7, mod_wsgi 4.3.0, gevent 1.0.1, Tornado 4.0.2, ...)

Security Vulnerabilities
------------------------

If you’ve identified a security vulnerability in a driver or any other
MongoDB project, please report it according to the `instructions here
<http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/tutorial/create-a-vulnerability-report>`_.

Installation
============

PyMongo can be installed with `pip <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo

Or ``easy_install`` from
`setuptools <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools>`_::

  $ python -m easy_install pymongo

You can also download the project source and do::

  $ python setup.py install

Do **not** install the "bson" package from pypi. PyMongo comes with its own
bson package; doing "easy_install bson" installs a third-party package that
is incompatible with PyMongo.

Dependencies
============

PyMongo supports CPython 2.7, 3.4+, PyPy, and PyPy3.5+.

Optional dependencies:

GSSAPI authentication requires `pykerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pykerberos>`_ on Unix or `WinKerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/winkerberos>`_ on Windows. The correct
dependency can be installed automatically along with PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi]

MONGODB-AWS authentication requires `botocore
<https://pypi.org/project/botocore/>`_ and `requests
<https://pypi.org/project/requests/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[aws]

Support for mongodb+srv:// URIs requires `dnspython
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/dnspython>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[srv]

TLS / SSL support may require `ipaddress
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ipaddress>`_ and `certifi
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/certifi>`_ or `wincertstore
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wincertstore>`_ depending on the Python
version in use. The necessary dependencies can be installed along with
PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[tls]

.. note:: Users of Python versions older than 2.7.9 will also
  receive the dependencies for OCSP when using the tls extra.

OCSP (Online Certificate Status Protocol) requires `PyOpenSSL
<https://pypi.org/project/pyOpenSSL/>`_, `requests
<https://pypi.org/project/requests/>`_ and `service_identity
<https://pypi.org/project/service_identity/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[ocsp]

Wire protocol compression with snappy requires `python-snappy
<https://pypi.org/project/python-snappy>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[snappy]

Wire protocol compression with zstandard requires `zstandard
<https://pypi.org/project/zstandard>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[zstd]

Client-Side Field Level Encryption requires `pymongocrypt
<https://pypi.org/project/pymongocrypt/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[encryption]

You can install all dependencies automatically with the following
command::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi,aws,ocsp,snappy,srv,tls,zstd,encryption]

Other optional packages:

- `backports.pbkdf2 <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/backports.pbkdf2/>`_,
  improves authentication performance with SCRAM-SHA-1 and SCRAM-SHA-256.
  It especially improves performance on Python versions older than 2.7.8.
- `monotonic <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/monotonic>`_ adds support for
  a monotonic clock, which improves reliability in environments
  where clock adjustments are frequent. Not needed in Python 3.


Additional dependencies are:

- (to generate documentation) sphinx_

Examples
========
Here's a basic example (for more see the *examples* section of the docs):

.. code-block:: python

  >>> import pymongo
  >>> client = pymongo.MongoClient("localhost", 27017)
  >>> db = client.test
  >>> db.name
  u'test'
  >>> db.my_collection
  Collection(Database(MongoClient('localhost', 27017), u'test'), u'my_collection')
  >>> db.my_collection.insert_one({"x": 10}).inserted_id
  ObjectId('4aba15ebe23f6b53b0000000')
  >>> db.my_collection.insert_one({"x": 8}).inserted_id
  ObjectId('4aba160ee23f6b543e000000')
  >>> db.my_collection.insert_one({"x": 11}).inserted_id
  ObjectId('4aba160ee23f6b543e000002')
  >>> db.my_collection.find_one()
  {u'x': 10, u'_id': ObjectId('4aba15ebe23f6b53b0000000')}
  >>> for item in db.my_collection.find():
  ...     print(item["x"])
  ...
  10
  8
  11
  >>> db.my_collection.create_index("x")
  u'x_1'
  >>> for item in db.my_collection.find().sort("x", pymongo.ASCENDING):
  ...     print(item["x"])
  ...
  8
  10
  11
  >>> [item["x"] for item in db.my_collection.find().limit(2).skip(1)]
  [8, 11]

Documentation
=============

Documentation is available at [pymongo.readthedocs.io](https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).

To build the documentation, you will need to install sphinx_.
Documentation can be generated by running **python
setup.py doc**. Generated documentation can be found in the
*doc/build/html/* directory.

Testing
=======

The easiest way to run the tests is to run **python setup.py test** in
the root of the distribution.

To verify that PyMongo works with Gevent's monkey-patching::

    $ python green_framework_test.py gevent

Or with Eventlet's::

    $ python green_framework_test.py eventlet

.. _sphinx: http://sphinx.pocoo.org/
