doc/examples/aggregation.rst, before:

Aggregation Examples
====================

There are several methods of performing aggregations in MongoDB.  These
examples cover the new aggregation framework, using map reduce and using the
group method.

.. testsetup::

  from pymongo import MongoClient
  client = MongoClient()
  client.drop_database('aggregation_example')

Setup
-----
To start, we'll insert some example data which we can perform
aggregations on:

.. doctest::

  >>> from pymongo import MongoClient
  >>> db = MongoClient().aggregation_example
  >>> result = db.things.insert_many([{"x": 1, "tags": ["dog", "cat"]},
  ...                                 {"x": 2, "tags": ["cat"]},
  ...                                 {"x": 2, "tags": ["mouse", "cat", "dog"]},
  ...                                 {"x": 3, "tags": []}])
  >>> result.inserted_ids
  [ObjectId('...'), ObjectId('...'), ObjectId('...'), ObjectId('...')]

.. _aggregate-examples:

Aggregation Framework
---------------------

This example shows how to use the
:meth:`~pymongo.collection.Collection.aggregate` method to use the aggregation
framework.  We'll perform a simple aggregation to count the number of
occurrences for each tag in the ``tags`` array, across the entire collection.
To achieve this we need to pass in three operations to the pipeline.
First, we need to unwind the ``tags`` array, then group by the tags and
sum them up, finally we sort by count.

As python dictionaries don't maintain order you should use :class:`~bson.son.SON`
or :class:`collections.OrderedDict` where explicit ordering is required
eg "$sort":

.. note::

    aggregate requires server version **>= 2.1.0**.

.. doctest::

  >>> from bson.son import SON
  >>> pipeline = [
  ...     {"$unwind": "$tags"},
  ...     {"$group": {"_id": "$tags", "count": {"$sum": 1}}},
  ...     {"$sort": SON([("count", -1), ("_id", -1)])}
  ... ]
  >>> import pprint
  >>> pprint.pprint(list(db.things.aggregate(pipeline)))
  [{u'_id': u'cat', u'count': 3},
   {u'_id': u'dog', u'count': 2},
   {u'_id': u'mouse', u'count': 1}]

To run an explain plan for this aggregation use the
:meth:`~pymongo.database.Database.command` method::

  >>> db.command('aggregate', 'things', pipeline=pipeline, explain=True)
  {u'ok': 1.0, u'stages': [...]}

As well as simple aggregations the aggregation framework provides projection
capabilities to reshape the returned data. Using projections and aggregation,
you can add computed fields, create new virtual sub-objects, and extract
sub-fields into the top-level of results.

.. seealso:: The full documentation for MongoDB's `aggregation framework
    <http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/applications/aggregation>`_

Map/Reduce
----------

Another option for aggregation is to use the map reduce framework.  Here we
will define **map** and **reduce** functions to also count the number of
occurrences for each tag in the ``tags`` array, across the entire collection.

Our **map** function just emits a single `(key, 1)` pair for each tag in
the array:

.. doctest::

  >>> from bson.code import Code
  >>> mapper = Code("""
  ...               function () {
  ...                 this.tags.forEach(function(z) {
  ...                   emit(z, 1);
  ...                 });
  ...               }
  ...               """)

The **reduce** function sums over all of the emitted values for a given key:

.. doctest::

  >>> reducer = Code("""
  ...                function (key, values) {
  ...                  var total = 0;
  ...                  for (var i = 0; i < values.length; i++) {
  ...                    total += values[i];
  ...                  }
  ...                  return total;
  ...                }
  ...                """)

.. note:: We can't just return ``values.length`` as the **reduce** function
   might be called iteratively on the results of other reduce steps.

Finally, we call :meth:`~pymongo.collection.Collection.map_reduce` and
iterate over the result collection:

.. doctest::

  >>> result = db.things.map_reduce(mapper, reducer, "myresults")
  >>> for doc in result.find():
  ...   pprint.pprint(doc)
  ...
  {u'_id': u'cat', u'value': 3.0}
  {u'_id': u'dog', u'value': 2.0}
  {u'_id': u'mouse', u'value': 1.0}

Advanced Map/Reduce
-------------------

PyMongo's API supports all of the features of MongoDB's map/reduce engine.
One interesting feature is the ability to get more detailed results when
desired, by passing `full_response=True` to
:meth:`~pymongo.collection.Collection.map_reduce`. This returns the full
response to the map/reduce command, rather than just the result collection:

.. doctest::

  >>> pprint.pprint(
  ...     db.things.map_reduce(mapper, reducer, "myresults", full_response=True))
  {...u'counts': {u'emit': 6, u'input': 4, u'output': 3, u'reduce': 2},
   u'ok': ...,
   u'result': u'...',
   u'timeMillis': ...}

All of the optional map/reduce parameters are also supported, simply pass them
as keyword arguments. In this example we use the `query` parameter to limit the
documents that will be mapped over:

.. doctest::

  >>> results = db.things.map_reduce(
  ...     mapper, reducer, "myresults", query={"x": {"$lt": 2}})
  >>> for doc in results.find():
  ...   pprint.pprint(doc)
  ...
  {u'_id': u'cat', u'value': 1.0}
  {u'_id': u'dog', u'value': 1.0}

You can use :class:`~bson.son.SON` or :class:`collections.OrderedDict` to
specify a different database to store the result collection:

.. doctest::

  >>> from bson.son import SON
  >>> pprint.pprint(
  ...     db.things.map_reduce(
  ...         mapper,
  ...         reducer,
  ...         out=SON([("replace", "results"), ("db", "outdb")]),
  ...         full_response=True))
  {...u'counts': {u'emit': 6, u'input': 4, u'output': 3, u'reduce': 2},
   u'ok': ...,
   u'result': {u'collection': ..., u'db': ...},
   u'timeMillis': ...}

.. seealso:: The full list of options for MongoDB's `map reduce engine <http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/MapReduce>`_

Commit message:

docs(aggregation-example): Removed ambiguity of aggregate command.
Removed ambiguity for aggregate command in MongoDB 3.6 or higher by adding a note.

doc/examples/aggregation.rst, after:

Aggregation Examples
====================

There are several methods of performing aggregations in MongoDB.  These
examples cover the new aggregation framework, using map reduce and using the
group method.

.. testsetup::

  from pymongo import MongoClient
  client = MongoClient()
  client.drop_database('aggregation_example')

Setup
-----
To start, we'll insert some example data which we can perform
aggregations on:

.. doctest::

  >>> from pymongo import MongoClient
  >>> db = MongoClient().aggregation_example
  >>> result = db.things.insert_many([{"x": 1, "tags": ["dog", "cat"]},
  ...                                 {"x": 2, "tags": ["cat"]},
  ...                                 {"x": 2, "tags": ["mouse", "cat", "dog"]},
  ...                                 {"x": 3, "tags": []}])
  >>> result.inserted_ids
  [ObjectId('...'), ObjectId('...'), ObjectId('...'), ObjectId('...')]

.. _aggregate-examples:

Aggregation Framework
---------------------

This example shows how to use the
:meth:`~pymongo.collection.Collection.aggregate` method to use the aggregation
framework.  We'll perform a simple aggregation to count the number of
occurrences for each tag in the ``tags`` array, across the entire collection.
To achieve this we need to pass in three operations to the pipeline.
First, we need to unwind the ``tags`` array, then group by the tags and
sum them up, finally we sort by count.

As python dictionaries don't maintain order you should use :class:`~bson.son.SON`
or :class:`collections.OrderedDict` where explicit ordering is required
eg "$sort":

.. note::

    aggregate requires server version **>= 2.1.0**.

.. doctest::

  >>> from bson.son import SON
  >>> pipeline = [
  ...     {"$unwind": "$tags"},
  ...     {"$group": {"_id": "$tags", "count": {"$sum": 1}}},
  ...     {"$sort": SON([("count", -1), ("_id", -1)])}
  ... ]
  >>> import pprint
  >>> pprint.pprint(list(db.things.aggregate(pipeline)))
  [{u'_id': u'cat', u'count': 3},
   {u'_id': u'dog', u'count': 2},
   {u'_id': u'mouse', u'count': 1}]

To run an explain plan for this aggregation use the
:meth:`~pymongo.database.Database.command` method::

  >>> db.command('aggregate', 'things', pipeline=pipeline, explain=True)
  {u'ok': 1.0, u'stages': [...]}

As well as simple aggregations the aggregation framework provides projection
capabilities to reshape the returned data. Using projections and aggregation,
you can add computed fields, create new virtual sub-objects, and extract
sub-fields into the top-level of results.

.. note:: We can also run **aggregate** command without **explain** option. MongoDB 3.6 or higher, removes the use of aggregate command without the cursor option unless the command includes the explain option.

.. seealso:: The full documentation for MongoDB's `aggregation framework
    <http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/applications/aggregation>`_

Map/Reduce
----------

Another option for aggregation is to use the map reduce framework.  Here we
will define **map** and **reduce** functions to also count the number of
occurrences for each tag in the ``tags`` array, across the entire collection.

Our **map** function just emits a single `(key, 1)` pair for each tag in
the array:

.. doctest::

  >>> from bson.code import Code
  >>> mapper = Code("""
  ...               function () {
  ...                 this.tags.forEach(function(z) {
  ...                   emit(z, 1);
  ...                 });
  ...               }
  ...               """)

The **reduce** function sums over all of the emitted values for a given key:

.. doctest::

  >>> reducer = Code("""
  ...                function (key, values) {
  ...                  var total = 0;
  ...                  for (var i = 0; i < values.length; i++) {
  ...                    total += values[i];
  ...                  }
  ...                  return total;
  ...                }
  ...                """)

.. note:: We can't just return ``values.length`` as the **reduce** function
   might be called iteratively on the results of other reduce steps.

Finally, we call :meth:`~pymongo.collection.Collection.map_reduce` and
iterate over the result collection:

.. doctest::

  >>> result = db.things.map_reduce(mapper, reducer, "myresults")
  >>> for doc in result.find():
  ...   pprint.pprint(doc)
  ...
  {u'_id': u'cat', u'value': 3.0}
  {u'_id': u'dog', u'value': 2.0}
  {u'_id': u'mouse', u'value': 1.0}

Advanced Map/Reduce
-------------------

PyMongo's API supports all of the features of MongoDB's map/reduce engine.
One interesting feature is the ability to get more detailed results when
desired, by passing `full_response=True` to
:meth:`~pymongo.collection.Collection.map_reduce`. This returns the full
response to the map/reduce command, rather than just the result collection:

.. doctest::

  >>> pprint.pprint(
  ...     db.things.map_reduce(mapper, reducer, "myresults", full_response=True))
  {...u'counts': {u'emit': 6, u'input': 4, u'output': 3, u'reduce': 2},
   u'ok': ...,
   u'result': u'...',
   u'timeMillis': ...}

All of the optional map/reduce parameters are also supported, simply pass them
as keyword arguments. In this example we use the `query` parameter to limit the
documents that will be mapped over:

.. doctest::

  >>> results = db.things.map_reduce(
  ...     mapper, reducer, "myresults", query={"x": {"$lt": 2}})
  >>> for doc in results.find():
  ...   pprint.pprint(doc)
  ...
  {u'_id': u'cat', u'value': 1.0}
  {u'_id': u'dog', u'value': 1.0}

You can use :class:`~bson.son.SON` or :class:`collections.OrderedDict` to
specify a different database to store the result collection:

.. doctest::

  >>> from bson.son import SON
  >>> pprint.pprint(
  ...     db.things.map_reduce(
  ...         mapper,
  ...         reducer,
  ...         out=SON([("replace", "results"), ("db", "outdb")]),
  ...         full_response=True))
  {...u'counts': {u'emit': 6, u'input': 4, u'output': 3, u'reduce': 2},
   u'ok': ...,
   u'result': {u'collection': ..., u'db': ...},
   u'timeMillis': ...}

.. seealso:: The full list of options for MongoDB's `map reduce engine <http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/MapReduce>`_
