doc/installation.rst, before:

Installing / Upgrading
======================
.. highlight:: bash

**PyMongo** is in the `Python Package Index
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pymongo/>`_.

.. warning:: **Do not install the "bson" package from pypi.** PyMongo comes
   with its own bson package; doing "pip install bson" or "easy_install bson"
   installs a third-party package that is incompatible with PyMongo.

Installing with pip
-------------------

We recommend using `pip <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_
to install pymongo on all platforms::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo

To get a specific version of pymongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo==3.5.1

To upgrade using pip::

  $ python -m pip install --upgrade pymongo

.. note::
  pip does not support installing python packages in .egg format. If you would
  like to install PyMongo from a .egg provided on pypi use easy_install
  instead.

Installing with easy_install
----------------------------

To use ``easy_install`` from
`setuptools <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools>`_ do::

  $ python -m easy_install pymongo

To upgrade do::

  $ python -m easy_install -U pymongo

Dependencies
------------

PyMongo supports CPython 2.7, 3.4+, PyPy, and PyPy3.5+.

Optional dependencies:

GSSAPI authentication requires `pykerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pykerberos>`_ on Unix or `WinKerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/winkerberos>`_ on Windows. The correct
dependency can be installed automatically along with PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi]

:ref:`MONGODB-AWS` authentication requires `pymongo-auth-aws
<https://pypi.org/project/pymongo-auth-aws/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[aws]

Support for mongodb+srv:// URIs requires `dnspython
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/dnspython>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[srv]

TLS / SSL support may require `ipaddress
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ipaddress>`_ and `certifi
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/certifi>`_ or `wincertstore
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wincertstore>`_ depending on the Python
version in use. The necessary dependencies can be installed along with
PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[tls]

.. note:: Users of Python versions older than 2.7.9 will also
  receive the dependencies for OCSP when using the tls extra.

:ref:`OCSP` requires `PyOpenSSL
<https://pypi.org/project/pyOpenSSL/>`_, `requests
<https://pypi.org/project/requests/>`_ and `service_identity
<https://pypi.org/project/service_identity/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[ocsp]

Wire protocol compression with snappy requires `python-snappy
<https://pypi.org/project/python-snappy>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[snappy]

Wire protocol compression with zstandard requires `zstandard
<https://pypi.org/project/zstandard>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[zstd]

:ref:`Client-Side Field Level Encryption` requires `pymongocrypt
<https://pypi.org/project/pymongocrypt/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[encryption]

You can install all dependencies automatically with the following
command::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi,aws,ocsp,snappy,srv,tls,zstd,encryption]

Other optional packages:

- `backports.pbkdf2 <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/backports.pbkdf2/>`_,
  improves authentication performance with SCRAM-SHA-1 and SCRAM-SHA-256.
  It especially improves performance on Python versions older than 2.7.8.
- `monotonic <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/monotonic>`_ adds support for
  a monotonic clock, which improves reliability in environments
  where clock adjustments are frequent. Not needed in Python 3.


Installing from source
----------------------

If you'd rather install directly from the source (i.e. to stay on the
bleeding edge), install the C extension dependencies then check out the
latest source from GitHub and install the driver from the resulting tree::

  $ git clone git://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver.git pymongo
  $ cd pymongo/
  $ python setup.py install

Installing from source on Unix
..............................

To build the optional C extensions on Linux or another non-macOS Unix you must
have the GNU C compiler (gcc) installed. Depending on your flavor of Unix
(or Linux distribution) you may also need a python development package that
provides the necessary header files for your version of Python. The package
name may vary from distro to distro.

Debian and Ubuntu users should issue the following command::

  $ sudo apt-get install build-essential python-dev

Users of Red Hat based distributions (RHEL, CentOS, Amazon Linux, Oracle Linux,
Fedora, etc.) should issue the following command::

  $ sudo yum install gcc python-devel

Installing from source on macOS / OSX
.....................................

If you want to install PyMongo with C extensions from source you will need
the command line developer tools. On modern versions of macOS they can be
installed by running the following in Terminal (found in
/Applications/Utilities/)::

  xcode-select --install

For older versions of OSX you may need Xcode. See the notes below for various
OSX and Xcode versions.

**Snow Leopard (10.6)** - Xcode 3 with 'UNIX Development Support'.

**Snow Leopard Xcode 4**: The Python versions shipped with OSX 10.6.x
are universal binaries. They support i386, PPC, and x86_64. Xcode 4 removed
support for PPC, causing the distutils version shipped with Apple's builds of
Python to fail to build the C extensions if you have Xcode 4 installed. There
is a workaround::

  # For some Python builds from python.org
  $ env ARCHFLAGS='-arch i386 -arch x86_64' python -m easy_install pymongo

See `http://bugs.python.org/issue11623 <http://bugs.python.org/issue11623>`_
for a more detailed explanation.

**Lion (10.7) and newer** - PyMongo's C extensions can be built against
versions of Python 2.7 >= 2.7.4 or Python 3.4+ downloaded from
python.org. In all cases Xcode must be installed with 'UNIX Development
Support'.

**Xcode 5.1**: Starting with version 5.1 the version of clang that ships with
Xcode throws an error when it encounters compiler flags it doesn't recognize.
This may cause C extension builds to fail with an error similar to::

  clang: error: unknown argument: '-mno-fused-madd' [-Wunused-command-line-argument-hard-error-in-future]

There are workarounds::

  # Apple specified workaround for Xcode 5.1
  # easy_install
  $ ARCHFLAGS=-Wno-error=unused-command-line-argument-hard-error-in-future easy_install pymongo
  # or pip
  $ ARCHFLAGS=-Wno-error=unused-command-line-argument-hard-error-in-future pip install pymongo

  # Alternative workaround using CFLAGS
  # easy_install
  $ CFLAGS=-Qunused-arguments easy_install pymongo
  # or pip
  $ CFLAGS=-Qunused-arguments pip install pymongo


Installing from source on Windows
.................................

If you want to install PyMongo with C extensions from source the following
requirements apply to both CPython and ActiveState's ActivePython:

64-bit Windows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For Python 3.5 and newer install Visual Studio 2015. For Python 3.4
install Visual Studio 2010. You must use the full version of Visual Studio
2010 as Visual C++ Express does not provide 64-bit compilers. Make sure that
you check the "x64 Compilers and Tools" option under Visual C++. For Python 2.7
install the `Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler for Python 2.7`_.

32-bit Windows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For Python 3.5 and newer install Visual Studio 2015.

For Python 3.4 install Visual C++ 2010 Express.

For Python 2.7 install the `Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler for Python 2.7`_

.. _`Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler for Python 2.7`: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266

.. _install-no-c:

Installing Without C Extensions
-------------------------------

By default, the driver attempts to build and install optional C
extensions (used for increasing performance) when it is installed. If
any extension fails to build the driver will be installed anyway but a
warning will be printed.

If you wish to install PyMongo without the C extensions, even if the
extensions build properly, it can be done using a command line option to
*setup.py*::

  $ python setup.py --no_ext install

Building PyMongo egg Packages
-----------------------------

Some organizations do not allow compilers and other build tools on production
systems. To install PyMongo on these systems with C extensions you may need to
build custom egg packages. Make sure that you have installed the dependencies
listed above for your operating system then run the following command in the
PyMongo source directory::

  $ python setup.py bdist_egg

The egg package can be found in the dist/ subdirectory. The file name will
resemble “pymongo-3.6-py2.7-linux-x86_64.egg” but may have a different name
depending on your platform and the version of python you use to compile.

.. warning::

  These “binary distributions,” will only work on systems that resemble the
  environment on which you built the package. In other words, ensure that
  operating systems and versions of Python and architecture (i.e. “32” or “64”
  bit) match.

Copy this file to the target system and issue the following command to install the
package::

  $ sudo python -m easy_install pymongo-3.6-py2.7-linux-x86_64.egg

Installing a beta or release candidate
--------------------------------------

MongoDB, Inc. may occasionally tag a beta or release candidate for testing by
the community before final release. These releases will not be uploaded to pypi
but can be found on the
`GitHub tags page <https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/tags>`_.
They can be installed by passing the full URL for the tag to pip::

  $ python -m pip install https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/archive/3.11.0rc0.tar.gz

Commit message:

PYTHON-2377 PYTHON-2413 PYTHON-2414 Deprecate old Pythons

doc/installation.rst, after:

Installing / Upgrading
======================
.. highlight:: bash

**PyMongo** is in the `Python Package Index
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pymongo/>`_.

.. warning:: **Do not install the "bson" package from pypi.** PyMongo comes
   with its own bson package; doing "pip install bson" or "easy_install bson"
   installs a third-party package that is incompatible with PyMongo.

Installing with pip
-------------------

We recommend using `pip <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_
to install pymongo on all platforms::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo

To get a specific version of pymongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo==3.5.1

To upgrade using pip::

  $ python -m pip install --upgrade pymongo

.. note::
  pip does not support installing python packages in .egg format. If you would
  like to install PyMongo from a .egg provided on pypi use easy_install
  instead.

Installing with easy_install
----------------------------

To use ``easy_install`` from
`setuptools <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools>`_ do::

  $ python -m easy_install pymongo

To upgrade do::

  $ python -m easy_install -U pymongo

Dependencies
------------

PyMongo supports CPython 2.7, 3.4+, PyPy, and PyPy3.5+.

.. warning:: Support for Python 2.7, 3.4 and 3.5 is deprecated. Those Python
    versions will not be supported by PyMongo 4.

Optional dependencies:

GSSAPI authentication requires `pykerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pykerberos>`_ on Unix or `WinKerberos
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/winkerberos>`_ on Windows. The correct
dependency can be installed automatically along with PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi]

:ref:`MONGODB-AWS` authentication requires `pymongo-auth-aws
<https://pypi.org/project/pymongo-auth-aws/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[aws]

Support for mongodb+srv:// URIs requires `dnspython
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/dnspython>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[srv]

TLS / SSL support may require `ipaddress
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ipaddress>`_ and `certifi
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/certifi>`_ or `wincertstore
<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/wincertstore>`_ depending on the Python
version in use. The necessary dependencies can be installed along with
PyMongo::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[tls]

.. note:: Users of Python versions older than 2.7.9 will also
  receive the dependencies for OCSP when using the tls extra.

:ref:`OCSP` requires `PyOpenSSL
<https://pypi.org/project/pyOpenSSL/>`_, `requests
<https://pypi.org/project/requests/>`_ and `service_identity
<https://pypi.org/project/service_identity/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[ocsp]

Wire protocol compression with snappy requires `python-snappy
<https://pypi.org/project/python-snappy>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[snappy]

Wire protocol compression with zstandard requires `zstandard
<https://pypi.org/project/zstandard>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[zstd]

:ref:`Client-Side Field Level Encryption` requires `pymongocrypt
<https://pypi.org/project/pymongocrypt/>`_::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[encryption]

You can install all dependencies automatically with the following
command::

  $ python -m pip install pymongo[gssapi,aws,ocsp,snappy,srv,tls,zstd,encryption]

Other optional packages:

- `backports.pbkdf2 <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/backports.pbkdf2/>`_,
  improves authentication performance with SCRAM-SHA-1 and SCRAM-SHA-256.
  It especially improves performance on Python versions older than 2.7.8.
- `monotonic <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/monotonic>`_ adds support for
  a monotonic clock, which improves reliability in environments
  where clock adjustments are frequent. Not needed in Python 3.


Installing from source
----------------------

If you'd rather install directly from the source (i.e. to stay on the
bleeding edge), install the C extension dependencies then check out the
latest source from GitHub and install the driver from the resulting tree::

  $ git clone git://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver.git pymongo
  $ cd pymongo/
  $ python setup.py install

Installing from source on Unix
..............................

To build the optional C extensions on Linux or another non-macOS Unix you must
have the GNU C compiler (gcc) installed. Depending on your flavor of Unix
(or Linux distribution) you may also need a python development package that
provides the necessary header files for your version of Python. The package
name may vary from distro to distro.

Debian and Ubuntu users should issue the following command::

  $ sudo apt-get install build-essential python-dev

Users of Red Hat based distributions (RHEL, CentOS, Amazon Linux, Oracle Linux,
Fedora, etc.) should issue the following command::

  $ sudo yum install gcc python-devel

Installing from source on macOS / OSX
.....................................

If you want to install PyMongo with C extensions from source you will need
the command line developer tools. On modern versions of macOS they can be
installed by running the following in Terminal (found in
/Applications/Utilities/)::

  xcode-select --install

For older versions of OSX you may need Xcode. See the notes below for various
OSX and Xcode versions.

**Snow Leopard (10.6)** - Xcode 3 with 'UNIX Development Support'.

**Snow Leopard Xcode 4**: The Python versions shipped with OSX 10.6.x
are universal binaries. They support i386, PPC, and x86_64. Xcode 4 removed
support for PPC, causing the distutils version shipped with Apple's builds of
Python to fail to build the C extensions if you have Xcode 4 installed. There
is a workaround::

  # For some Python builds from python.org
  $ env ARCHFLAGS='-arch i386 -arch x86_64' python -m easy_install pymongo

See `http://bugs.python.org/issue11623 <http://bugs.python.org/issue11623>`_
for a more detailed explanation.

**Lion (10.7) and newer** - PyMongo's C extensions can be built against
versions of Python 2.7 >= 2.7.4 or Python 3.4+ downloaded from
python.org. In all cases Xcode must be installed with 'UNIX Development
Support'.

**Xcode 5.1**: Starting with version 5.1 the version of clang that ships with
Xcode throws an error when it encounters compiler flags it doesn't recognize.
This may cause C extension builds to fail with an error similar to::

  clang: error: unknown argument: '-mno-fused-madd' [-Wunused-command-line-argument-hard-error-in-future]

There are workarounds::

  # Apple specified workaround for Xcode 5.1
  # easy_install
  $ ARCHFLAGS=-Wno-error=unused-command-line-argument-hard-error-in-future easy_install pymongo
  # or pip
  $ ARCHFLAGS=-Wno-error=unused-command-line-argument-hard-error-in-future pip install pymongo

  # Alternative workaround using CFLAGS
  # easy_install
  $ CFLAGS=-Qunused-arguments easy_install pymongo
  # or pip
  $ CFLAGS=-Qunused-arguments pip install pymongo


Installing from source on Windows
.................................

If you want to install PyMongo with C extensions from source the following
requirements apply to both CPython and ActiveState's ActivePython:

64-bit Windows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For Python 3.5 and newer install Visual Studio 2015. For Python 3.4
install Visual Studio 2010. You must use the full version of Visual Studio
2010 as Visual C++ Express does not provide 64-bit compilers. Make sure that
you check the "x64 Compilers and Tools" option under Visual C++. For Python 2.7
install the `Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler for Python 2.7`_.

32-bit Windows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For Python 3.5 and newer install Visual Studio 2015.

For Python 3.4 install Visual C++ 2010 Express.

For Python 2.7 install the `Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler for Python 2.7`_

.. _`Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler for Python 2.7`: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266

.. _install-no-c:

Installing Without C Extensions
-------------------------------

By default, the driver attempts to build and install optional C
extensions (used for increasing performance) when it is installed. If
any extension fails to build the driver will be installed anyway but a
warning will be printed.

If you wish to install PyMongo without the C extensions, even if the
extensions build properly, it can be done using a command line option to
*setup.py*::

  $ python setup.py --no_ext install

Building PyMongo egg Packages
-----------------------------

Some organizations do not allow compilers and other build tools on production
systems. To install PyMongo on these systems with C extensions you may need to
build custom egg packages. Make sure that you have installed the dependencies
listed above for your operating system then run the following command in the
PyMongo source directory::

  $ python setup.py bdist_egg

The egg package can be found in the dist/ subdirectory. The file name will
resemble “pymongo-3.6-py2.7-linux-x86_64.egg” but may have a different name
depending on your platform and the version of python you use to compile.

.. warning::

  These “binary distributions,” will only work on systems that resemble the
  environment on which you built the package. In other words, ensure that
  operating systems and versions of Python and architecture (i.e. “32” or “64”
  bit) match.

Copy this file to the target system and issue the following command to install the
package::

  $ sudo python -m easy_install pymongo-3.6-py2.7-linux-x86_64.egg

Installing a beta or release candidate
--------------------------------------

MongoDB, Inc. may occasionally tag a beta or release candidate for testing by
the community before final release. These releases will not be uploaded to pypi
but can be found on the
`GitHub tags page <https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/tags>`_.
They can be installed by passing the full URL for the tag to pip::

  $ python -m pip install https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-python-driver/archive/3.11.0rc0.tar.gz
