Periodic Executors
==================

.. currentmodule:: pymongo

PyMongo implements a :class:`~periodic_executor.PeriodicExecutor` for two
purposes: as the background thread for :class:`~monitor.Monitor`, and to
regularly check if there are `OP_KILL_CURSORS` messages that must be sent to the server.

Killing Cursors
---------------

An incompletely iterated :class:`~cursor.Cursor` on the client represents an
open cursor object on the server. In code like this, we lose a reference to
the cursor before finishing iteration::

    for doc in collection.find():
        raise Exception()

We try to send an `OP_KILL_CURSORS` to the server to tell it to clean up the
server-side cursor. But we must not take any locks directly from the cursor's
destructor (see `PYTHON-799`_), so we cannot safely use the PyMongo data
structures required to send a message. The solution is to add the cursor's id
to an array on the :class:`~mongo_client.MongoClient` without taking any locks.

Each client has a :class:`~periodic_executor.PeriodicExecutor` devoted to
checking the array for cursor ids. Any it sees are the result of cursors that
were freed while the server-side cursor was still open. The executor can safely
take the locks it needs in order to send the `OP_KILL_CURSORS` message.

.. _PYTHON-799: https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON-799

Stopping Executors
------------------

Just as :class:`~cursor.Cursor` must not take any locks from its destructor,
neither can :class:`~mongo_client.MongoClient` and :class:`~topology.Topology`.
Thus, although the client calls :meth:`close` on its kill-cursors thread, and
the topology calls :meth:`close` on all its monitor threads, the :meth:`close`
method cannot actually call :meth:`wake` on the executor, since :meth:`wake`
takes a lock.

Instead, executors wake periodically to check if ``self.close`` is set,
and if so they exit.

A thread can log spurious errors if it wakes late in the Python interpreter's
shutdown sequence, so we try to join threads before then. Each periodic
executor (either a monitor or a kill-cursors thread) adds a weakref to itself
to a set called ``_EXECUTORS``, in the ``periodic_executor`` module.

An `exit handler`_ runs on shutdown and tells all executors to stop, then
tries (with a short timeout) to join all executor threads.

.. _exit handler: https://docs.python.org/2/library/atexit.html

Monitoring
----------

For each server in the topology, :class:`~topology.Topology` uses a periodic
executor to launch a monitor thread. This thread must not prevent the topology
from being freed, so it weakrefs the topology. Furthermore, it uses a weakref
callback to terminate itself soon after the topology is freed.

Solid lines represent strong references, dashed lines weak ones:

.. generated with graphviz: "dot -Tpng periodic-executor-refs.dot > periodic-executor-refs.png"

.. image:: ../static/periodic-executor-refs.png

See `Stopping Executors`_ above for an explanation of the ``_EXECUTORS`` set.

It is a requirement of the `Server Discovery And Monitoring Spec`_ that a
sleeping monitor can be awakened early. Aside from infrequent wakeups to do
their appointed chores, and occasional interruptions, periodic executors also
wake periodically to check if they should terminate.

Our first implementation of this idea was the obvious one: use the Python
standard library's threading.Condition.wait with a timeout. Another thread
wakes the executor early by signaling the condition variable.

A topology cannot signal the condition variable to tell the executor to
terminate, because it would risk a deadlock in the garbage collector: no
destructor or weakref callback can take a lock to signal the condition variable
(see `PYTHON-863`_); thus the only way for a dying object to terminate a
periodic executor is to set its "stopped" flag and let the executor see the
flag next time it wakes.

We erred on the side of prompt cleanup, and set the check interval at 100ms. We
assumed that checking a flag and going back to sleep 10 times a second was
cheap on modern machines.

Starting in Python 3.2, the builtin C implementation of lock.acquire takes a
timeout parameter, so Python 3.2+ Condition variables sleep simply by calling
lock.acquire; they are implemented as efficiently as expected.

But in Python 2, lock.acquire has no timeout. To wait with a timeout, a Python
2 condition variable sleeps a millisecond, tries to acquire the lock, sleeps
twice as long, and tries again. This exponential backoff reaches a maximum
sleep time of 50ms.

If PyMongo calls the condition variable's "wait" method with a short timeout,
the exponential backoff is restarted frequently. Overall, the condition variable
is not waking a few times a second, but hundreds of times. (See `PYTHON-983`_.)

Thus the current design of periodic executors is surprisingly simple: they
do a simple `time.sleep` for a half-second, check if it is time to wake or
terminate, and sleep again.

.. _Server Discovery And Monitoring Spec: https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/server-discovery-and-monitoring/server-monitoring.rst#requesting-an-immediate-check

.. _PYTHON-863: https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON-863

.. _PYTHON-983: https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/PYTHON-983
